Report write-up (#20)
mikanikos/Fork-Accountability: report/thesis.tex

> 

Reviewer: I am not Dr. :D

Author: Fixed :D

\begin{document}
\maketitle

\begin{abstract}

> This report presents the fork accountability problem, which concerns with the detection of nodes responsible of a fork in a distributed network of machines running BFT consensus when the system is compromised. We analyze and study such a challenge in the context of the Tendermint protocol, whose consensus algorithm does not currently have any mechanism to make all replicas accountable of their actions in the case of a fork when more than one third of machines in the system are faulty. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this report we discuss the fork accountability problem, which concerns with the detection of nodes responsible for a fork in a distributed network of machines running BFT consensus when the system is compromised. We analyze and study such a challenge in the context of the Tendermint protocol, whose consensus algorithm does not currently have any mechanism to make all replicas accountable of their actions in the case of a fork when more than one third of machines in the system are faulty. 
```

Author: Fixed

> We are going to focus on describing the design of a fork accountability solution in Tendermint that was conceived by researchers from the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne and Informal Systems and show how this algorithm can guarantee the detection of at least f + 1 faulty processes in a completely asynchronous system. The core part of this work focuses on validating this proposal with a proof-of-concept environment where the algorithm was developed and tested along with several features. Finally, some benchmarks and experiments have been carried out in order to give the idea of the computational complexity of the solution from a performance point of view.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We are going to focus on describing the design of a fork accountability solution for Tendermint consensus algorithm, that was conceived by researchers from the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne and Informal Systems. This solution can guarantee the detection of at least f + 1 faulty processes in a completely asynchronous system. The core contribution of this work consists on validating this proposal with a proof-of-concept implementation where the algorithm was developed and tested along with several features. Finally, some benchmarks and experiments have been carried out in order to give the idea of the computational complexity of the solution from a performance point of view.
```

Reviewer: I think we should avoid "f + 1" here. The reader is not familiar with "f" parameter.

Author: Fixed, Jovan is right we should not mention f yet (fixed it as well).

\chapter{Introduction}
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

Tendermint is a partially synchronous protocol which provides a simple and efficient algorithm to solve the problem of Byzantine fault tolerant (BFT) consensus in a distributed network of processes. As every other BFT consensus protocol, the Tendermint algorithm relies on the assumption that byzantine processes are limited to a certain threshold: this assumption allows correct processes to have enough voting power to approve new blocks and guarantees the correctness and validity of the blockchain throughout the entire execution of the protocol. 

> When this assumption cannot be ensured, malicious processes can cause the failure of the algorithm and create deviations from the main chain (better known as forks). In such cases, a valid protocol should provide some reliable guarantees that, under certain constraints, allow the protocol to recover from the fault, detect the faulty processes responsible of a fork and eventually re-store the conditions for the safe execution of the consensus algorithm.     

Reviewer 2: Not sure what you mean by "valid" in this sentence.

```suggestion
When this assumption cannot be ensured, malicious processes can cause the failure of the algorithm and create deviations from the main chain (better known as forks). In such cases, a failover solution should provide some reliable guarantees that, under certain constraints, allow the consensus algorithm to recover from the fault, detect the faulty processes responsible of a fork and eventually re-store the conditions for the safe execution of the consensus algorithm.     
```

Author: Yeah "failover" is more appropriate in this case, valid was way too general. Fixed

> We define this problem as fork accountability and in this report we present and analyzes the conditions, the challenges and the consequences given by this inconsistency in Tendermint. In order to properly introduce the reader to the topic, an overview of the Tendermint protocol is presented before diving into the fork accountability problem (Chapter 2). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We define this problem as fork accountability and in this report we present and analyze the conditions, the challenges and the consequences given by this inconsistency in Tendermint. In order to properly introduce the reader to the topic, an overview of the Tendermint protocol is presented before diving into the fork accountability problem (Chapter 2). 
```

Author: Fixed

This work proposes a fork accountability algorithm that solves such a problem without making any assumption on the communication model: we are going to describe its design and details by analyzing the possible attack scenarios and the variety of challenges faced and the trade-offs made during the study of such a solution by the researchers from the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne and Informal Systems (Chapter 3). 

In order to get a more practical idea of the potential of the designed solution, this project aimed to implement the accountability algorithm in a simplified environment that gives the possibility to run experiments and test the application with different configuration and settings (Chapter 4). 

Thanks to the flexibility and modularity of the developed project, it has also been possible to evaluate the accountability algorithm in terms of computational resources and get a better idea of its performance (Chapter 5). 

We conclude this report with some interesting aspects and topics related to the fork accountability problem which could be further studied and analyzed in future work (Chapter 6). 

> The result of this work is a high-level, working implementation of a fork accountability solution, properly validated from a theoretical and practical point of view, The implementation also offers promising results in tests along with good performance overall and can potentially offer a solid and well-founded contribution to the development of a fork accountability algorithm in the actual Tendermint production code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The main contribution of this thesis is a working implementation of a fork accountability solution,  validated from a theoretical and practical point of view. The implementation also offers promising results in tests along with good performance overall and can potentially offer a solid and well-founded contribution to the development of a fork accountability algorithm in the production Tendermint code.
```

Author: Fixed

- **PRECOMMIT message**: sent by validators to vote for a value during the second voting step

A correct process decides on a value *v* in a round *r* upon receiving a proposal and quorum of at least *2f + 1* PRECOMMIT messages for *v* in a round *r*. 
A correct process sends a PRECOMMIT message for a value *v* in a round *r* upon receiving a proposal and a quorum of at least *2f + 1* PREVOTE messages for *v* in a round *r*.

Validators wait some time before sending a PREVOTE for *nil* if they do not receive a valid proposal after a certain time (*proposalTimeout*) and they send a PRECOMMIT message for *nil* if they do not receive at least *2f + 1* matching PREVOTE messages for a value after a certain time (*prevoteTimeout*).
If processes do not receive at least *2f + 1* matching PRECOMMIT messages for a value after a certain time (*precommitTimeout*), they move to the next round.

After a decision has been made, processes continue to agree on other values on another consensus instance (*height*) and they repeat the process described above in order to agree on different blocks.

\end{markdown}

\begin{figure}[h]
\centering

> \includegraphics[scale=0.45]{tendermint_schema.png} 

Reviewer 2: This figure looks nice, it could go in your presentation. I would avoid going into too much details, however, about the consensus algorithm, since there are many subtleties that can be tricky to explain. So I would stay high level.

Author: Agree, will do.

## Agreement property

We present the agreement property of the Tendermint protocol because it is important to properly frame the fork accountability problem. In this section we also give a simple proof of the agreement property and show that it is not possible to violate the agreement property in Tendermint if there are at most *f* faulty processes.

### Idea behind the proof

> The key idea behind the proof of the agreement property is that any two sets of *2f + 1* processes have at least one correct process in common.

Reviewer: This should go below the sentence "we assume n = 3f + 1"

Author: True, fixed

     
That means that the intersection of these two sets contains at least *f + 1* processes or, in other words, at least one correct process.  

> Given this result, we can easily prove the impossibility of having two sets of *2f + 1* PREVOTE or PRECOMMIT messages in the same round *r* for different values. If we assume the opposite by contradiction, then it would be possible to have at least *f + 1* processes that sent both the messages, which would mean *f + 1* are faulty. But at most *f* processes can be faulty in Tendermint, so the contradiction.

Reviewer: "which would mean f + 1 PROCESSES are faulty".

Author: Fixed

Moreover, at most one value can be locked in a round and, if a correct process decided value *v* in round *r*, *v* will be locked for all the next rounds after *r* on that height. This ensures that it is not possible to have another quorum for committing another value different than *v*.

### Proof

In order to formalize the above idea, we present a simple formal proof of the property,

> Assume that a correct process *p* decides value *v* in round *r* and height *h*. We want to prove that any other correct process *p'* in some round *r' >= r* of height *h* decides *v'* such that *v'* = *v*.

Reviewer: "height IS h"

Author: Fixed

### Guarantees 

As said before, the Tendermint consensus protocol is a simple and efficient algorithm that guarantees the four properties mentioned above. These properties are valid as long as faulty processes are at most one third of the total number of validators in the system.

> However, when this assumption is not valid anymore, processes can decide on different values in the same consensus instance and the blockchain can potentially diverge into two potential decision paths, making the entire protocol break.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, when this assumption is broken, processes can decide on different values in the same consensus instance and the blockchain can potentially diverge into two potential decision paths, making the entire protocol break.
```

Author: Fixed

## Fork accountability

The agreement property of the Tendermint consensus algorithm can be violated if there are more than *f* faulty processes in the system, as previously discussed. When this situation occurs, more than one block can be decided in a single height and the protocol rules are violated. Since it is not possible to prevent this situation when the the limit on the number of faulty processes in the system is exceeded, we aim to at least identify faulty processes and ban them from the set of validators in order to re-establish a normal situation. We present such a problem, known as fork accountability, in more detail in this section.  

### Definition

A **fork** is a split in the blockchain network or, in other words, a divergence into different block paths. 
A fork happens when two correct validators decide on different blocks in the same height (i.e., there are two commits for different blocks in the same consensus instance). 

> In the context of the Tendermint protocol, a fork happens in height *h* when a quorum of messages (at least *2f + 1* PRECOMMIT messages) are sent for different values: more formally, there are two sets of at least *2f + 1* PRECOMMIT messages, A and B, such that A's messages are PRECOMMIT votes for value *v* and B's messages are PRECOMMIT votes for value *v' != v* in height *h*.  

Reviewer: use \neq instead of !=

Author: Fixed for all the occurrences

The Tendermint consensus algorithm guarantees that a fork (i.e., a violation of the agreement property) cannot happen when the number of faulty processes is less than one third.
We want to address and analyze the problem of defining a Tendermint consensus algorithm that provides the same four properties (validity, agreement, termination, integrity) when the number of faulty processes is less than one third and guarantees, in addition, an efficient detection of faulty processes responsible of a fork when there are more than one third of faulty validators.

In particular, we assume there are more than one third of faulty validators such that the following holds:[^1]

    f < num. faulty processes <= 2f

> [^1]: Fork accountability cannot be solved when the number of faulty proccesses is greater than *2f*: in this case, faulty processes basically control the system and nothing can be done to solve the problem.

Reviewer: Not true. If every message has its justification, then it is.

Reviewer: We should remove this

Author: Yeah we already said that, it is now here again because I moved some parts in other chapter of the report and, in fact, this was previously part of the discussion about the piggybacking solution which now I mention in the Future work chapter. I'll remove this for simplicity.

> - A process sends multiple PREVOTE/PRECOMMIT messages in a round *r* for different values (**equivocation**)

Reviewer 2: If there are references to these scenarios, it would be a good idea to cite those references (or put them in footnotes).

Reviewer 2: You can even have a full-fledged bibliography section ("References"), which usually looks very professional (but it's not necessary).

Author: Done, I added the bibliography and references for most of the material I read.

- **detect(P)**: process P is faulty according to the accountability algorithm

All the processes that are detected are considered faulty because, by misbehaving, they are responsible for a fork. Some faulty processes could still be undetected because they were not responsible for a fork, even though they were faulty.

> ### Properties

Reviewer: "f + 1- completnees" - detects at LEAST f + 1 processes

Author: Fixed

> 

Author: True, fixed.

- **accuracy**: if the accountability algorithm detects a process *p*, then process *p* is faulty

- **f+1-completeness**: the accountability algorithm eventually detects at least *f + 1* different processes

## Monitor

> In order to simplify the design of the algorithm, we introduce a trusted third-party verification entity, called **monitor**, which is responsible to run the accountability algorithm~\cite{fork-accountability-specs}.

Author: Added the definition and tried to better explain that concept you mentioned in the monitor section. Please let me know if it's still not clear.

> In order to simplify the design of the algorithm, we introduce a trusted third-party verification entity, called **monitor**, which is responsible to run the accountability algorithm~\cite{fork-accountability-specs}.

Reviewer: It's great now, thanks! :)

> 

Author: Fixed

## Fork scenarios

In order to better understand the problem, we analyze the scenarios when the fork can happen and how the monitor would be able to handle the situation when analyzing the log received from each validator~\cite{fork-scenarios}.

> From now on, the expression "leading to a fork" will be used to generally define a set of actions carried out by a process that caused a fork. 

Author: Rephrased the sentence, please let me know if it's still not clear.

> 

Author: Fixed

> We assume that messages exchanged in the consensus algorithm are signed and it is not possible to forge messages (i.e., some process *p* cannot state that it has received a message from process *p'* if p' did not send that message or *p* did not receive it). 

Author: Moved this part at the beginning of the design chapter because it makes more sense to state the assumptions before talking about the rest.

In the case of a synchronous model, the monitor should wait a certain amount of time (*timeout*) to receive all the message logs before running the accountability algorithm.

After the *timeout*, if some process *p* did not send its message log, the monitor can only consider *p* faulty due to the nature of the communication, even though it does not have all the information to determine its misbehavior with certainty~\cite{fork-accountability-specs}. 

> On the other hand, by not considering *p* faulty, the monitor might not be able to find at least *f + 1* faulty processes that led to a fork.

Author: Expanded a bit more on the last sentence, please let me know if it's still not clear.

> On the other hand, by not considering *p* faulty, the monitor might not be able to find at least *f + 1* faulty processes that led to a fork.

Reviewer: Better :)

> #### Asynchronous model

Author: I defined equivocation at the end of the second chapter, in the "Attack scenarios" section. It is not like a super formal definition but I think it explains well what it is. 

For the second comment, I added some sentences in order to make the idea of impossibility more explicit.

Please let me know if you think if anything is unclear and I can try to expand on both comments as you suggested.

> 

Author: Fixed

## Fork detection

A fork detection solution~\cite{failure-detection} aims to detect a fork as soon as possible in a reliable and efficient way.

We define the following interface for a fork detection algorithm:

> 

Author: Yes I remember we discussed this and I think the section explains pretty much what we have said in simple words, what do you think it is not correct or should be modified in particular?

> 

Reviewer: You don't need to have a trusted third party connected to every validator.
Oh, I see that COMMIT = DECISION.
Nevertheless, I would remove the sentence "you need to have a trusted third party..." just to avoid potential questions that may arise.

> 

Author: Fixed

    // upon receiving at least 2f+1 precommit for height h from a process 
    deliverCommit(messageSet, height):
   
        // verify if the message set is a valid commit
	    if verify(messageSet):
		    // check if this was the first decision for this height
		    if heightCommitMap[height]:
			    // fork has been detected
			    detect(height)
		    else:
			    heightCommitMap[height] = true

This is not meant to be a complete solution to the problem because it just provides a basic intuitive idea to handle the fork detection. It also lacks a formal theoretical support which is required for the full refinement of the algorithm.
The validation and a possible proof of concept of this algorithm is left to future work.

## Fork recovery

A fork recovery mechanism allows validators to agree on the state of the system after a fork occurred. 
This step should occur after validators have run the fork accountability algorithm and it includes the ban of faulty processes (detected by a fork accountability algorithm) from the validator set and the possible restart of the blockchain with the new validator set.

> It is clear that the Tendermint consensus algorithm cannot proceed further without having enough validators, namely 4 validators, in order to make the algorithm work correctly. In fact, there is no quorum of at least *2f + 1* processes that allow to satisfy the Tendermint consensus rules when there are only 4 validators in the system. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is clear that the Tendermint consensus algorithm cannot proceed further without having enough correct validators, namely 4 validators, in order to make the algorithm work correctly. In fact, there is no quorum of at least *2f + 1* processes that allow to satisfy the Tendermint consensus rules when there are only 4 validators in the system. 
```

Author: Fixed

            startHeight(height)
        else:
            throwError("The new set of validators doesn't have enough participants")
           
    // external methods and variables
    - getCurrentValidatorSet(): retrieves the current list of validators in the system
    
    - getCurrentSystemState(): retrieves the current state of the validator
    
    - restoreState(State): restore the validator state to the state given as parameter
    
    - MIN_CONSENSUS_PARTICIPANTS: defines the minimum number of validators
    allowed by the protocol
    

> Although this solution could be considered valid at first, a future study should be dedicated to the complete validation and study of this algorithm.

Reviewer 2: It would be interesting to mention these three future direction (detection, recovery, efficiency enhancements) briefly in your project presentations.

Author: I agree, I will probably have a slide dedicated to these four directions.

> 

Reviewer: "Decentralized fork accountability" 
I wouldn't call this problem "Decentralized fork accountability" since we have that (if we mention that what monitor does is done by every correct process".
Instead, I think Adi's proposal is great "Fork tolerance".
Since the goal of this problem is to eject faulty processes and eventually reach the decision.

Author: I agree, modified the title and the first part of the section accordingly.

\chapter{Conclusion}
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

In this work we have tackled the fork accountability problem from different points of view in order to better show all the theoretical and practical implications this challenge offers. From a high-level perspective, we have concretely defined the problem, analyzed all the scenarios where the problem can occur and analyzed the main misbehaviors a process can do to create the conditions of a fork.

> After tackling the problem, we described the design and the implementation of a fork accountability algorithm in Tendermint. We showed how it is possible to implement an algorithm when the communication between the monitor and validators is completely asynchronous, made the different algorithmic parts more concrete and took steps into implementing and getting a sense of the validity of this algorithm. We carefully studied and tested the proposed solution both from a correctness and a performance point of view, thanks to the numerous experiments and benchmarks that have been carried out, and proved that the algorithm is correct and efficient in terms of computational complexity. 

Reviewer 2: Maybe mention again that you implemented the algorithm in Go.

Author: Fixed
